Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
Ikal!
WHERE THE TRACKS END
If you want to be one of us.
you must pass the test. okay?
Why are you stopping?
Are you afraid. or what?
I'm not afraid.
I don't know if it's a good idea.
I think I see him.
Go.
My grandma once told me
that the spirits of some dead people
stay here wandering.
Don't believe your grandma.
Are you afraid of the dead?
I'm more afraid of the living.
Did you hear that?
What?
-A noise.
-No. it's Tuerto's belly.
I don't want a dead person to chase me.
Nobody will chase us
because we don't even know if he's dead.
Did you hear that?
Come on. Poke him.
Leave him alone. Chico!
He's dead.
Hey!
I'm your friend.
Was he your owner?
Wanna be my friend?
Miss. I swear he was dead.
Yes. but don't pull me
or you'll make me fall.
What if the new kid was eaten?
And who's supposed to eat whom?
Well. the monster.
Okay. Calm down.
Breathe. Just breathe.
Tell me. what did you find?
A dead person or a monster?
A dead person.
but we were walking
and a monster appeared.
And where's the new kid? Or who is he?
That's him. miss. There he is!
He shruvived!
The right word is "survived." Tuerto.
Oh.
So that's the new kid.
Thank you. Robertito.
-See you later. miss.
-Okay. kids.
POLICE
The officer says that.
apparently. he was homeless.
They'll investigate who he is.
and then they can tell the family.
What's the new one called?
Ikal Machuca.
Nice to meet you.
Did you come with the workers?
Yes.
-And when will you go to school?
-I don't know. Is there a school?
Of course there is.
And in this town.
all kids must go to school.
Do you want a cigarette?
Good evening. Bety.
Good evening.
Good evening. miss.
Good evening. gentlemen.
-Dad.
-Ikal.
Where were you. son? Huh?
Miss Georgina.
Good evening. sir.
I am Miss Georgina.
I swear. Dad.
He came to me. He adopted me.
Yeah.
Oh. son. you and your nonsense.
But you told me to go out
and make friends.
Yes. but I didn't tell you
to go find a dead person.
You haven't told me
what grade you're in. Ikal.
I don't know.
What do you mean?
Well. we travel a lot.
There aren't any schools
at the places where we go. right?
Just send him to me
and I'll see what level he's at.
Can you read?
Well.
some letters. drawings.
How old is this child?
It's imperative for him
to acquire some skills at this age.
I'll send him to school tomorrow. miss.
Oh. I don't want to go to school.
You'll do what the teacher
and your mom say. okay?
-And if I'm asked to do something bad?
-Oh. God.
Don't start with that.
And say goodbye to that dog.
Here you go. miss.
-It looks delicious. Thanks.
-I hope you like it.
Are you okay. ma'am?
These last few days she's been a bit sick.
but she's improving.
No. miss. Everything is fine.
Ikal and my husband
take good care of me. right?
-Quetzal can also take care of you.
-Oh. son.
The doctor said
that we can't have animals at home.
I promise you
that we'll have a dog someday.
But why can't I be like the other kids?
We're always moving around.
from town to town. like grasshoppers.
And when I finally find a true friend.
you don't let me keep him.
-It isn't fair.
-Who said life was fair?
If it isn't fair.
why can't you let me have a dog?
I apologize for interrupting.
but if you let Ikal keep the dog.
it can sleep at the school at night.
And don't worry about the food.
I'll take care of it.
As long as this child learns to read.
-Thank you. miss.
-Look at that smile.
I'd never seen someone so happy
about learning to read.
-Well. I'll have a dog.
-No. young man. not yet.
Your parents haven't agreed yet.
Please.
Okay.
You can keep the dog.
But only if you eat up your tamales
before they get cold.
Quetzal!
Come on.
-Hello.
-Are you keeping him?
Yes. he's mine.
But the teacher will let him sleep here.
Good morning.
Good morning. kids.
-Which is my classroom?
-This is the whole school. silly. Come.
Welcome. Ikal.
Thank you.
You stay here.
And to the north. we have the Rio Grande.
Let's see.
Who can tell me something
about this river?
Me.
Okay. What can you tell me. Diana?
It's the one you have to cross
to have a wet back.
Yes.
Yes. Diana is right.
The Short Kids sit at the front.
Piolín. "Dynamite" Dianita. and Carola.
Do you want my advice?
Don't mess with them. They're terrible.
Oh. and also Juani.
He's Tuerto's little brother.
What group do I belong to?
You'll be one of the Bald Kids.
Along with Chesco. Tuerto. Uriel.
Olivia. and Lupe.
-Why are they bald?
-Because they have lice.
And all the way back. the Dirt Poor--
The "Dirt Poor"?
Valeria. please come to the blackboard
and tell me which is
the most important river in our state.
-Go.
-Yes. miss.
What wonderful river
did your mind go flying to. Ikal?
If you want to learn.
you have to pay attention to your lessons.
Let's see.
Can you read that?
Read.
"The…"
All right.
Come to see me after class. Understood?
Understood?
-Answer when someone asks a question.
-Yes. miss.
-Hey. do you want to play?
-Yes.
PLEASE THROW THE GARBAGE IN THE CAN
-Hi.
-Do you want one?
-Yes. thanks.
-You're welcome.
-What group are you in?
Us? We're the Dirt Poor.
Are you going to start? That's not true.
We'll be dirt poor like our parents
and like our grandparents.
Why do you say that?
Maybe you think otherwise.
but your family has land.
Mine has nothing.
They work for whatever the damn boss
wants to give them.
Look. I'll be a locomotive driver
at Union Pacific.
And I'll go all around the world by train.
I will work at our ranch.
I will cross the Rio Grande
and become a millionaire in the USA.
Doing what?
I don't know.
You don't even speak Spanish properly.
I don't think you can learn English
just like that.
Idiot.
What will you be when you grow up?
Will you operate the train?
I don't know.
I don't even know
what I'll do later today.
I do know what you'll do.
You'll go with Miss Georgina.
…two. three.
We have to reach 2.000
and make up for the lost time.
The rain is coming
and this will get very tough.
-I want no excuses. Get to work.
-My timber is heavier.
I hadn't heard that one.
You're gossiping a lot. Get to work.
But he's the best boss.
Do you smoke?
No.
I blow smoke through my mouth.
Since you're new.
I'd like to clarify something.
If you're part of my gang.
you do what I say. Okay?
I'm the boss.
I don't have a boss.
You do. You'll see. Worm.
I don't. You'll see.
Quetzal!
Come on.
-How did it go. son?
-Fine.
Yes? Are you happy?
-Yes.
-Oh.
Hey. who was that guy. huh?
Is he at your school?
-He's one of the Dirt Poor.
-What?
-One of the Older Kids.
-Oh.
Well. be very careful with him. okay?
Why?
I don't know.
It's a mom thing.
Come on.
Who's there?
It's me.
The new kid.
Ikal.
Oh.
Okay.
I was expecting you
20 minutes ago. young man.
Sorry.
I told you that if you want to learn.
you must be disciplined.
Okay. do me a favor.
Bring me that blue book in the corner.
Yes. miss.
Is he your husband?
That's none of your business.
Do what I said.
Sit down.
Okay.
Let's see.
Here.
Read this.
"This…"
"This is…"
-Which is this one?
-Which one?
This one.
-B.
-Oh. yes. it's a B.
B…
"Bo…"
"Boc…"
I'm sorry.
Why do you apologize?
Because I can't read.
Then what you have to do is study.
not apologize.
I want to see you here
Tuesday and Thursday afternoons.
Why would I want to read?
Well. to know things.
To have fun.
To use that head that God gave you.
Reading is boring.
How would you know that?
I won't beg you.
Look.
if you don't want to learn.
don't make me waste my time.
-May I leave?
-Yes. go ahead.
Hey. listen.
I'll give you something.
Kalimán!
I'll lend it to you on one condition.
That you have to read it here
three times a week.
Do you agree?
-Yes.
-All right.
-Thank you. miss.
-Okay.
Come on. Quetzal.
This kid.
Martita.
Good morning. Inspector.
-How is it good. Mirna?
-Oh.
You're in a fighting mood.
Why are you so cheerful?
Yes. Ha. ha. ha!
Oh. God.
-Good morning. sir.
-Good morning. Valenzuela.
How are we doing. Valenzuela?
-We're doing good.
-I need you to step it up.
Elections are near.
Let's make a good impression.
-Yes. I know.
-Then move.
Don't waste time.
For today.
-What? That's it?
-Yes.
Sure. Thank you.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC EDUCATION
INSPECTION OF SCHOOL DISTRICT 07B
All done?
How did it go?
Give me that.
Do you want coffee?
Yes. I'm beat.
Ikal!
Hi. Dad.
What is that?
What are you doing?
Nothing. I'm just learning how to read.
But I'm quite dumb.
Hey. no.
Don't call yourself that. son.
How's it going with the teacher?
Look. son. I know it's hard to study
when you're constantly moving
from one place to another.
It might not seem like it.
but we're doing all this for you.
You know that. right?
Yes.
Now. a bit of homework.
No!
You woke up very grouchy today.
Look. next week.
I want the Short Kids
to bring me a plant or a flower.
May I bring whatever I want?
Sure. whatever you like. Very good.
And I want the Bald Kids
to bring me a bug.
Ew!
Why "ew"?
But I want the bug alive
when it gets here.
-All right?
-Miss?
-Yes?
-And what are we bringing?
A cow?
Because we don't even have hens at home.
What I want the Older Kids to bring
is a fruit or a vegetable.
-Is the homework clear?
-Yes. miss!
Okay. I don't want excuses.
No…
-Mr. Machuca.
-Yes. Mom?
Can you describe the homework for me?
Can you describe it?
I need you to pay attention in class. sir!
Find out what the homework is.
And don't even think of coming without it.
What's up. little snakes?
Take out your notebooks. Let's do math.
No!
Oh. my God. These kids.
-Goodbye!
-Goodbye.
-Quetzal.
See you tomorrow.
-Bye. brother.
-Sit.
Sit.
Quetzal. sit.
I swear he does obey. Look. Quetzal. sit.
Yes. he's very obedient.
It's clear you won't be a teacher.
And you won't be a wetback
because you can't even swim.
Yes. I can.
Not drowning is one thing.
but swimming across the river
is totally different.
I could swim across the river.
-Sure. since you are a worm…
-I can probably swim better than you.
Wanna bet?
The loser
treats the whole gang to ice cream.
I'll get a chocolate one.
The first one
to reach the other side wins.
And in dollars.
Are you ready to cross
to the United States?
Are you sure you want to do this?
You'll have to speak English
on the other side.
I'm ready.
-Come on. swim!
-Swim!
Swim!
Come on!
If you do that. you'll get shot!
Come on! You can do it!
You're a cheater!
I won!
-I won!
-Yes!
Welcome to America!
I told you I was going to win.
Don't you have anything harder for me?
It was really easy.
He cheated. He pulled my foot.
Don't be whiny. Worm. Be a good sport.
Come on. Get out of the water.
He cheated.
You have to pay your part of the bet.
I don't pay cheaters.
Please stop fighting.
You're in the land of opportunity.
It was just a reminder
of who the gang leader is.
I'm leaving.
Quetzal!
Damn dog. You're going to pay for this.
Ikal Machuca!
What happened?
We were in the river
and suddenly--
Where are your clothes?
Don't be upset. Mom.
I'm fine. Nothing happened to me.
Ikal!
Here.
-Thank you.
-You're welcome.
I'll see you at school tomorrow.
See you later. ma'am.
You're grounded.
"Car… car…"
"Care…"
-"Carful."
-What does that mean?
-I don't know.
-Then try again.
Traitor.
I don't want you to talk to me
or bark at me.
What happened?
He betrayed me.
How can he betray you if he's just a dog?
Don't get distracted. Go on.
Don't play the martyr.
I told you to focus.
Keep going.
Quetzal.
"Car. care. careful. Kalimán."
There you go!
That's what it says.
Inspector.
-Sir.
-How nice to see you.
Welcome.
That's why it was said
that they were the Sun's children.
Excuse me. miss.
Good morning.
Good morning. Inspector.
Children.
"Good morning."
Good morning.
Xalapa. Veracruz.
Villahermosa. Tabasco.
Mérida…
Mérida. Yucatán.
La Paz. Baja California.
Hugo.
Kids. hold on a minute.
As long as we optimize the resources.
we'll reach more children
throughout Mexico.
Do you know how many people
depend on this little school?
And that way. we intend to improve
the current educational system.
Modernize it.
I cannot accept this.
The director general
needs to come. to see these children.
and realize we need more schools
instead of closing down this one.
What is this?
A notice for the closing down
of the school. miss.
No. that's not possible. I mean…
How do I tell the parents?
It's for the greater good…
"For the greater good." my ass!
Not even you believe that!
-You don't need to--
-If you're done. why don't you leave?
Believe me. I'm not--
-Please.
-I don't like giving bad news.
What will happen to the children?
Use this time to prepare them.
When did you stop believing in children?
When did you stop believing in teaching?
Ikal.
Come on. son. Wake up.
You're running really late.
Come on.
Come on. Get up.
Wash your face. The water is ready.
Look.
Your clothes are ready as well.
Don't get wet. Ikal.
I don't want you to get sick.
By the way.
someone is waiting for you outside.
-Behave and do your best.
-Yes. Mom.
Quetzal!
Come on.
Now I can trust you.
"And. that way…
Kalimán
got ready for his nex…
next adventure."
"The end."
Shake my hand.
Congratulations. young man.
You just managed to read your first book.
Very good.
Do you really enjoy reading. miss?
I love it.
But
the day will come. sooner than later.
when I won't be able to read anything.
I have cataracts.
Lots of water in your eyes?
No.
Not that kind of cataracts.
This is a disease.
And it's progressing very fast.
It gets worse every day.
Oh. well.
So. the day will come
when I won't be able to read.
and then.
the day when I won't see anything.
I will read to you all the Kalimán books
that you want. miss.
I promise.
Thank you. Ikal.
Have you ever thought of
what you'd like to be when you grow up?
No.
With your imagination.
you could do lots of things.
But I get distracted easily.
Well. we're all different.
My son was like you.
So. you just need to be more disciplined.
You have a son?
He died.
He and my husband died
in a highway accident.
That was many years ago.
And do you miss them?
Every single day.
Okay. Come on.
Let's keep practicing.
See you on Thursday.
-Thank you. miss.
-Sure.
Oh. miss…
Yes?
I know what I want to be when I'm older.
What?
A teacher.
Quetzal.
Listen up! Listen up. everybody!
You can't miss the show
of the amazing Palace of Wonders.
Your eyes have never seen
anything like it.
Come to the Palace.
Be a part of the wonders.
Don't stay there. You'll have fun.
The whole town can come.
Come. The Palace opened its doors…
Oh. my God!
Did you see that? We have to go.
I always wanted to go to one
and see a magician
pull a rabbit from a hat.
Those are only tricks.
But magic tricks.
-But they're tricks.
-But magic ones.
We have to go.
Sure. How will we pay for it?
-I will treat you.
-With what money?
The circus is for dummies.
Isn't it?
How would I know? I've never been to one.
You know what's more fun than the circus?
The waterwheel. Let's go.
-Let's go.
-What is that?
Why didn't Valeria want to come?
Ignore her.
She doesn't know how to have fun.
Is your belly grumbling?
What did you eat?
Do you have a mouse in your belly?
Shut up. fool.
Did you hear that?
It's number 24.
No. It's Pullman number 49-64.
They only pass by on Wednesdays.
Where are they headed?
Laredo.
-What time do they arrive?
-22:25.
How come you know so much?
My dad gave me an itinerary.
I study it sometimes.
Hey. do you see that back there?
What?
You can't imagine.
Come.
Come on. Quetzal.
He's itchy. just like me.
He's a lot like me.
Okay. come on.
Jump.
Thanks.
Come on.
-Stay and keep watch.
-Come here.
What's this?
The land of my father's boss.
-All of this?
-All of it and more.
You can't even see where it ends.
He has a well. horses. laborers.
The son of a bitch has everything.
Damn.
It's very big.
It looks like a palace.
Don't be silly.
There are no palaces in Mexico.
The municipal palace.
But that's not a real palace.
What?
Have you eaten yet?
-Yes.
-No.
Let's go inside.
Wow.
Oh. my.
How delicious.
Wine.
Help me with this one.
I'll see what I can find in the pantry.
Someone broke into the house!
Lorenzo!
Juan. someone broke into the house!
It's them! Juan!
-Run!
-They went that way.
They went that way. That way!
-Who were they?
Some damn kids.
Hey. don't shoot.
It's private property.
They're kids. Lorenzo.
No. Juan. they're thieves.
Run!
I thought you weren't hungry. Tuerto.
It's because I got scared.
Wanna see something?
They're silver.
-You stole them?
-The boss is the thief.
If we sell them. we can get enough money
to go to the circus.
I thought the circus was for dummies.
Do you want some?
Give me that.
No.
I'm leaving.
Let's go. Tuerto.
Wait for me.
The fewer. the better.
Okay. All done.
How was it?
What do you think?
It was amazing. Fantastic.
-See you later.
-See you tomorrow.
Actually.
I think it's a very brave thing to do.
-What? Closing down schools?
-No.
Being the face of the department.
Well. I'd like to be a more.
I don't know. cheerful face.
-Bye. See you tomorrow.
-See you tomorrow.
I think the director
really likes your work.
-Has he left?
-Yes. a while ago.
-He had a lunch meeting.
-Again?
It's as if eating was his job.
He's always at breakfast.
lunch. supper. and dinner meetings.
You know how politics is.
And speaking of politics.
have you had dinner?
-Do you want to go get something?
-Are you inviting me to dinner?
No. I'm saying we should go together.
but you'll pay.
Come on.
No. I already have plans.
With whom?
I'm just teasing you.
Hmm…
All right. I'll see you tomorrow.
Sounds good.
-Have a good rest. Good night.
-You too.
-Do you want anything else?
-The check.
Come get your breakfast. son.
It's served. It'll go cold.
Did you do your homework?
The homework!
What? You didn't look for anything?
-Ikal.
-I have to go.
Hey. boy!
-Come on. Quetzal.
-Be careful.
Yes.
Relax.
It's for my homework.
Get out!
You're late. What do you have there?
Nothing. It's a surprise.
Come on. Tell us what it is.
Where is Chico?
He isn't coming.
Is he sick?
Yes. something like that.
Good morning! Sit down. kids.
Kids. let's start the class.
Very well.
Good morning. children.
Good morning. miss.
-Did you all bring your homework?
-Yes!
Very good.
The students who brought living organisms
will take them back to their environment.
Because what is it
that we must always respect?
-Nature!
Very good.
Let's start with you. Mr. Rodríguez.
Come here.
-Can you show us what you found?
-Yes. but carefully because it can escape.
Let's see. Come here.
Very good. Come here.
Very good.
Let's see.
-Let's see.
-How pretty.
How pretty. It's a butterfly.
Exactly.
It's a monarch butterfly. Very good.
Let's learn about monarch butterflies.
Did you know that monarch butterflies
fly from Canada all the way to Mexico?
No!
It's one of nature's
most fascinating insects.
It reminds me of you a bit.
I see you going
from one place to the other.
From north to south.
working on our country's railroads.
What do you think?
-Thanks. miss.
-Very good.
Okay. let's see.
Let's see. Ikal.
Why are you so quiet?
What do you have there?
-Nothing.
-What do you mean?
Come here. Come.
Oh. young man.
Let's see. Give me that.
Ew!
He got that bug from his toilet at home.
-You're the one who came from a toilet.
-Quiet!
Be quiet!
No laughing.
What do you see here. Ikal?
-A horrible bug.
-I don't see a horrible bug.
I see a wonderful living organism.
It's a salamander.
Come closer to see it. That's it.
It's one of the most fascinating
living organisms there are.
It's a salamander. Beautiful. right?
It's an extraordinary living organism.
-Extraordinary?
-Yes. extraordinary.
Did you know that salamanders
can adapt to living almost anywhere?
Always remember that.
As long as you are alive.
you can become whatever you want.
And you can live wherever you want.
You are alive.
so choose your life wisely.
Choose what you want carefully.
so that you can be happy.
Do you know
what these animals are also called?
No!
Tritons.
Do you know what a triton is?
Your homework is to find out.
Thanks. miss.
Excellent job. young man.
Excellent!
Thanks. miss.
Very good.
Let's see who is next. Dianita. come here.
Let's see what you brought. What is this?
Tell me. what's the plan?
Are you dressing up as a clown?
Because you are great at that.
"I'll do a magic trick for you. Valeria."
Yes. I'll dress as a clown.
and you as an ass.
Hello!
I guess you came to get tickets.
Yes.
Come here.
Lady.
do you know if the magician
will pull a rabbit from their hat?
You're not talking to a lady.
You're talking to the magician!
A lady magician?
And not just any magician.
She's Etérea. the Magician.
She created this whole show.
which has travelled all over the world.
Spain.
France. Japan.
China…
And who are you?
Diamantina.
my right-hand person.
And my left-hand one too.
She's known internationally
for her beauty.
-Oh.
-Of course you are.
How are you able to speak
so many languages?
The universal language
of magic and fantasy.
My friend wants to know
if you'll make a rabbit appear.
-He'll invite the girl he likes.
-Shut up!
Then bring your future girlfriend.
It's a show she will never forget.
Never.
So what. are you buying tickets or not?
Only if you make a rabbit appear.
Does this answer your question?
How much are the tickets?
Two-fifty.
Hold on.
Come here.
Voilà.
Catch it.
What is this?
A two-for-one coupon.
Thank you.
Okay. there you go.
-Bye.
-Thank you! Goodbye.
Goodbye. magician.
Cheers.
Two hundred forty…
Ikal.
Go to bed. my son.
-Yes.
-Have you brushed your teeth?
Yes. Mom.
Turn off the light.
Go to bed.
You haven't said a word
since you got home. Tomás.
What's the matter?
Are you okay?
There are many rumors spreading
among the team.
Nobody knows how long the work will last.
We've almost finished the section.
Did the union people say anything?
They say this administration
is looking for ways to cut expenses.
Tomás.
You know that I can also work.
I don't know how we'll do it.
but you won't work
until you have fully recovered.
I will be fine.
We will be fine.
Besides. look.
I feel this place agrees with me.
And I think it agrees with Ikal too.
Let me help you with the dishes.
-Ready.
-Lift them.
The sun is intense.
Oh. yes. It's hot.
If you want to rest. go home. dudes.
We must finish this section.
Let's take a break. boss.
The sun is very intense.
Tomás Machuca and his ideas.
All right.
This team can take a break.
You'll make up for it
when it's not as hot.
Thank you. boss.
Thanks. boss.
Domínguez.
Can you do me a favor?
Yes.
Can you tell me what it says here?
"For my dad
from his son. Ikal."
The Palace of Wonders
opens its doors to kids and adults.
You cannot miss
this exciting show.
The Palace of Wonders opens its doors.
Come see us!
Goodbye!
Recess is over. kids!
Come on!
Why go to the circus
when you already look like one?
This one.
Are you serious because of the circus?
Don't worry.
It was too much money
to be able to get it.
Well.
the thing is…
that I wanted
to do magic for you.
I will show you a trick.
Give me your Kalimán.
Now pay close attention
because I'll make it disappear.
Close your eyes.
Go on. Close them.
Hey!
What do clouds taste like?
Sugar?
Okay. Your turn.
I already chose.
You can choose whatever you like.
Cotton.
That doesn't count. I chose that.
Choose something else.
One day. you'll also find
this children's game boring.
You'll find it boring to sit here
and imagine
what clouds look or taste like.
Valeria.
playing with you
will never be boring to me.
I like playing with you.
Get out! Go!
Get out!
Go!
Get out! Go!
Come on. Get out!
The teacher gave us a lot of homework.
A lot.
I like History.
-What's he looking at?
-What are you barking at. Quetzal?
Hey. friends.
-What happened to your face?
-I fell.
Against whose fist?
Nobody's.
Why didn't you come to class?
I have something for you. Valeria.
Hold on.
The teacher asked about you.
You can let me see your notes later.
Here you go.
It's a ticket for the Palace of Wonders.
Thank you.
I have another little thing here.
It's for Tuerto.
-Oh. gosh. For me?
-Sure.
I thought the circus was for dummies.
I also have something for you. Worm.
Thank you.
I love it. It's beautiful.
PALACE OF WONDERS
Hello!
Here you go.
-Here you go.
-Thanks.
Where did you get so much money?
Working.
-Where?
-On the boss's land.
-Bravo!
-Friend!
-Ladies and gentlemen. girls and boys.
Welcome to the Palace of Wonders.
where dreams become reality.
Bravo!
On this beautiful night.
I want to invite you
to go on a ride through the stars.
Here is Roldán.
the air man!
-Give it up for him!
-Bravo!
Bravo!
Why aren't you laughing?
Clowns don't make me laugh.
-How do they make you feel?
-Sad.
And now. Diamantina
will perform
one of the most chilling tricks
in showbusiness.
We ask you to remain silent
so that she can focus.
What's wrong?
No. I cannot watch that.
Cover your eyes
and we'll tell you when it's over.
And now.
one of the most enigmatic illusionists
in Mexico and Latin America.
She has travelled all over the world.
From the mystical city of Aztlán.
here is Etérea. the Magician!
What's she going to do?
She will be cut in half.
Her legs will be
where her hands should be.
Restore her. Etérea.
It is just magic.
I wouldn't like to be cut in half.
even if it was only magic.
And now.
my favorite moment.
Diamantina…
Look. a hat!
If a rabbit comes out. I'll die.
Etérea. a rabbit.
What is it?
The rabbit!
-No!
-Goodbye!
We want a rabbit!
What do we have here?
-Bravo!
Thank you!
Welcome to the Palace of Wonders.
My sister won't believe me
when I tell her all this.
Next time the circus comes.
we'll invite her.
How did you get the tickets. Chico?
It's none of your business.
Where did you get them?
Don't be nosy.
What did you steal?
What's your problem. asshole?
Apologize.
-Apologize!
-No!
You will apologize.
-Make me!
-Stupid midget!
There he is!
Come here. damn blondie!
Come here. asshole!
No. What do we do now?
-We should tell Miss Georgina.
-Let's go home instead.
No. We can't leave him alone.
Let's go get some help.
Get him!
Stop. asshole! Calm down!
Stop!
Stay there. asshole!
-What do you want?
-Don't move! Let's go.
-Move.
-Asshole.
I don't like that boy.
He's on his own. He doesn't have anybody.
He's a bad influence.
He could endanger Ikal.
He'll have to decide on his own
what is best for him.
-Including his friends.
-No.
You should talk to him. Tomás.
He doesn't listen to me.
Don't worry.
He's fine.
Who does something like that?
We can all help him mend his ways.
-Please. gentlemen.
-Ikal.
That boy doesn't have many opportunities.
Please consider it.
-I want to know what they say.
-It's adult stuff.
They're talking about my friend.
What do you want from us?
-Come with us to talk to the boss.
-The boss?
Yes.
Why did he get in trouble with that man?
Hunger.
And what will we say to him?
We'll ask him to release him.
We'll say that we vouch for him. right?
Why would the landowner listen
to a bunch of ignorant laborers?
We heard he'll bring good business
here in town. miss.
That's why we're fixing the tracks.
We don't want to get in trouble.
He could be the son of any of you.
Miss.
we're sorry.
I hope you understand.
We'd really like to help.
But we can't.
Good night.
-Good night. miss.
-Good night.
Please.
Chico!
Why are you here?
Leave before they see you.
Are you okay?
Yes.
I think they will release me.
Everybody is worried about you.
Really?
Yes. They were asking about you.
That idiotic boss thinks he'll scare me.
but that won't happen.
-I brought you something.
-What?
-A file to help me escape?
-A gift for the gang leader.
Some tamales and a Kalimán.
How delicious.
Damn Worm.
Silence.
I should go.
Ikal…
Thanks for being my friend.
Take care.
Tomás.
the boy is awake.
Good morning.
Thank you.
Good morning. Dad.
Come. son. Take a seat.
We want to talk to you.
I only brought him a present.
What do you mean?
-Sit down.
-Nothing.
Look. son.
I know it's very hard
to be constantly moving to a new place.
We're moving again?
Wait. Let your father finish talking.
I asked the union to assign me
to a fixed location.
They said no.
So. your mom and I
made a very important decision.
It won't be easy.
but we think it's the best for all of us.
We're going to move.
Aren't you happy?
But I don't want to move to the city.
I want to stay here.
And who said we would move to the city?
Your dad will quit his job. son.
We'll look for a house in this town
while you finish elementary school.
Really?
Really. Are you happy?
Yes!
Huh?
Thank you!
You're very strong now. son.
Did you hear that. Quetzal?
We're not leaving. We're staying!
Let's tell everybody!
We're staying!
Come on!
Hey!
We're staying!
We're not leaving!
Etérea!
-Guess what?
-What?
We're staying!
We won't live in the railcar anymore.
-Oh. that sounds great.
-Yes.
-I'll see you next year.
-Of course. See you next year.
Well. if we manage to leave. Look at this.
Yes.
Valeria!
She's over there.
-Ikal!
-Valeria!
We're staying!
Why?
My dad will quit his job.
-I'll tell you later.
-Yes. Bye!
-I'll tell everybody.
-Yes.
-Quetzal. come on!
-Bye.
Ikal.
Chico.
Did you escape?
No.
I was released.
My family will stay and live here. Chico.
-Really?
-Yes.
Are you okay?
If I move a bit. even my ass hurts.
Well. ask Tuerto to massage it.
Don't make me laugh. idiot.
Who beat you up?
The boss's men.
I want to leave. and you want to stay.
One person's heaven
is another person's hell.
Okay.
Let's go. It's getting late.
You go.
I'll stay around here.
I won't go back to my dad's house.
What are you going to do then?
You could stay at the school with Quetzal.
Miss Georgina
would be very happy to see you.
-Are you sure?
-Yes. I am.
Okay. I should go.
My mom will beat me up.
and it's getting really late.
You can ask Tuerto to massage your ass.
I'm out of here.
Quetzal!
Ikal…
I am glad you're staying.
Hugo.
Good morning.
I was wondering what that noise was.
-You're here very early.
-I guess.
Anything new for today?
No. We'll keep working
on the new development plan.
The only thing that plan is developing
in me is horrible nightmares.
Good morning.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC EDUCATION
-Mirna. is someone with the boss?
-No. but he's busy.
-I'll go inside.
-No. wait!
I'll get admonished.
Now what? Why don't you knock?
-I apologize. sir.
-Thanks. Mirna.
I'm sorry.
Sir…
I'm sorry. but I cannot do it.
Valenzuela. I know it's a hard job.
but it's for the greater good.
No. but please look at them.
Yes. Everything we do
is to ensure a better future for them.
That's the thing. For these kids.
the future is a very distant thing.
They just have their present.
-I'll be back in the afternoon.
-Yes. sir.
Valenzuela. you aren't gauging
the meaning of the federal reform.
It's an effort.
But it's also a sacrifice for everyone.
For you. for me.
for the kids at that school.
Then send someone else.
There's nobody else. It's your job.
Dad!
Son!
Thank you very much. Dad.
I love you very much.
I love you very much too. boy!
I'll be a good student.
You will be proud of me.
I am already proud of you. son.
Let's sing.
I sell beans!
Well. you are in Apizaco
I know many of you
want to leave this town.
Some of you
have already requested a transfer.
But that won't happen
until we finish this section.
But. boss. it's dangerous.
Yes. it is.
We'll finish by the end of the month.
regardless of what happens.
Great things are expected for this area.
And that won't start until this is ready.
If someone doesn't like it.
they know where the exit is.
You.
Tomás Machuca.
you're always asking for breaks.
so serve as an example.
Come on!
Let's do it.
Come on.
All of you. Come on!
It's not like you'll shrink.
Come on!
"Each person…"
Give me a moment. kids.
Miss?
May I read?
Yes. please.
Thank you.
Pay attention
to what your classmates read.
"Each person…
is on their own
in the heart of the planet."
"Just like a sunbeam…
when…"
Some people
are coming to the school. miss.
They're coming here.
Okay. Go on. Pay attention.
"It was barely op… open.
the indo…"
-Miss. can you please come?
-Yes. sure.
Do you think I haven't noticed?
-What?
-That you help the teacher.
Ikal.
Come with me. please.
Come on. son.
I have to bring you to your mom.
Ikal!
Son.
Dad!
Come. son. Please help me with this.
You'll really enjoy your cousins' company.
I don't even remember them.
I know.
But I'm sure you'll enjoy their company.
Why can't we stay here?
Because we're all leaving. Ikal.
We'll be fine.
We'll be fine. son.
It's okay.
It's okay. You can cry.
Cry if you want to cry. Ikal.
Cry as much as you need. son.
Can't we bring Quetzal with us?
No.
I can't leave him alone. I promised.
But Quetzal will be with the teacher.
He won't be alone.
Your friends will also take care of him.
And. once we get settled.
you'll be able to come and visit them.
I don't want to come back here.
Let's go!
We leave in two hours. people.
Come on! Up!
In two hours!
I'll pray to the Virgin
to look after you and your boy. Lucero.
Thanks. Toña.
I'll go see if my husband
has packed everything.
Okay.
Hey. Antonia.
Thank you very much for everything.
-Ikal!
-You are welcome.
-See you later.
-Ikal!
-Bye. Ikal!
Bye.
Ikal!
Miss Georgina has a surprise for you.
Come on.
I can't. We're about to leave.
-Come on. Let's go.
-Yes. let's go.
Go on. Go say goodbye.
We still have some time.
Give me that.
-I won't be long.
-Okay.
-Come on.
-Let's go.
Hurry. or I'll get there first!
Miss! We brought him!
-He's here.
-We brought Ikal.
Come here. Ikal.
We decided to take the class photo early
so that you can be in it. Come on.
Kids. Ikal is here.
-Hi. Ikal!
-Go to your spots. just like we practiced.
Did you like the surprise?
This is the cherry on top.
Chico! You came!
Did you think I'd miss being in the photo?
Quetzal!
Okay.
All right. Alejandro.
We're ready.
One. two…
Cheese!
Come in.
You'll do really well in the city.
You'll see.
Why are you sad? What's wrong?
Have you forgotten?
I told you.
You are a triton.
The lizard?
No.
Someone who can adapt
and survive anywhere.
Do you know who Triton is?
For the Greeks.
he was the god of the seas.
Never underestimate yourself. Ikal.
Promise?
Okay.
Are you going to miss me?
Do you know what?
When I lost my son…
a big hole opened right here.
And you remind me of him.
You're a brilliant young man.
Don't forget that.
I have a present for you.
now that you can read.
Jules Verne.
It's my favorite.
Okay…
You should go.
Your mom must be waiting for you. Go on.
Miss…
thank you.
Are you ready?
Let's go.
Are you hungry?
No.
-If you get hungry. let me know.
-Yes. Mom.
Mexican National Railways
announce
the departure of the train heading
to Tepetitla. Apizaco.
Tlahuapan.
Texcoco.
and Mexico City. as its final destination.
Buenavista Station.
Ikal!
This way.
Valeria!
Goodbye. Valeria!
Goodbye!
-Goodbye!
Goodbye. Ikal!
Goodbye. Tuerto!
Goodbye. Chico!
Ikal!
Quetzal…
Goodbye. Ikal.
MALINALLI TEPENEPATL
PUBLIC SCHOOL
-What do you think Ikal is doing?
-I'm sure he's arrived.
Do you think he remembers us?
Of course. He'll always be our friend.
For me. he'll always be a worm.
-Pakal.
Come here.
Hey. gorgeous.
Pakal?
Good afternoon.
How can I help you?
Hugo…
Hugo Valenzuela.
The inspector.
Sorry for the condition of this place.
Ever since the principal died.
the school went downhill.
And. as you can see.
the school needs lots of resources.
-Was it a long time ago?
-What?
The passing of the principal.
It will be seven years in January.
Look…
You came to close down the school.
Don't take it badly. It's part of
a development plan.
Where did you get this?
It was in the file.
Damn Worm!
I'm sorry.
Forgive me.
I studied agricultural engineering.
But I came back. and I decided
to take charge of the school.
What happened to Quetzal?
He died of old age.
And the little dog
that you saw at the school
is called Pakal.
He's his grandson.
Why did you change your name?
After what happened to my dad.
when we arrived in the city…
I wanted to vanish.
You obviously succeeded.
TOMÁS MACHUCA LIES HERE
R.I.P.
Well. my middle name is Hugo
and my mom's maiden name is Valenzuela.
That's why we need two names
and two last names. right?
You never know.
Hey. and where is Tuerto?
Where do you think?
Operating a train. right?
Hey. and…
you won't tell me anything about Chico?
What do you want me to tell you?
He was in the newspaper.
They said it was a fight among thieves.
but we all know who killed him.
What will you do now?
Are there vacancies at the school?
They'll close it down.
I don't know who. I won't.
You'll get fired.
Fine by me.
I didn't study education to do this.
I studied to teach.
There's something for you.
Don't look at me like that. Ikal.
Come here.
This is for you.
Open it.
Read what it says there.
And don't tell me you have forgotten.
"For the triton.
Ikal Machuca."
Thank you.
Pepe. what did we say? Come on this side.
Sir. may I show you my homework?
You'll show it to me after recess. Yes?
Yes. sir.
-Be careful.
-Yes.
Subtitle translation by: G.R.